In this video, we're going to continue our discussion of generators.
There's also another way to use generators, using something called a generator expression,
but we can to come back to that after seeing what list comprehensions are. Now in the database section
of this course,
we used a music database.
Now that database contained 440 albums by 203 artists, with a total of over 5000 songs.
Now Australia is the land of sun and surf and if I spend all the time
typing that data into the database, well then I won't have any time left to play with the crocodiles on
the beach.
I'm joking but, of course, I didn't type all that information in - I got Python to do it for me.
So let's have a look at how. So create a new Python project.
Now I've called mine musicfiles, as you can see on screen,
and the next thing I'm going to do is create a file called filegen.py.
Okay, so the source of that data was the mp3 file stored on disk -
that's the music database I'm talking about.
So in this video, we're going to look at working with the computer's file system.
Now you may not have any music files on your computer, which could make this video difficult to follow
along with. With services like Spotify,
that's definitely a possibility.
Now you might not even like music.
You might just listen to Justin Bieber instead.
So we've included a zip file, containing files for older songs in the music database, that we used in
section 13.
You can download that file - music.zip - from the resources section for this video.
Now, just to be clear, these aren't real mp3 files in that zip file.
Obviously the real files are copyright,
so we can't go distributing them, and the other thing would be that it wouldn't be realistic anyway because
there'd be over 64 gigabyte of downloads to accurately download all those songs, which would be obviously, way
over the top.
Now the other thing we've done, is we've used the extension emp3 with each file -
that's because an e at the start - so that if your music player automatically picks up new mp3 files
from your hard disk, extracting the files from the zip won't mess that up at all.
Alright, so you want to download that file - zip file - and extract that file into the music directory from
the zip file that you've downloaded into the project directory, and it should it up with a subdirectory
similar to what you can see here.
There's the music.zip, and if I open it up and have a look you can see we've got folders there, and we've also got the actual artist,
the album name and then all the individual songs. So you should end up with something similar.
And obviously, you can see they're showing up in the project pane.
There are a lot of files in there but the whole thing expands to under 3 megabytes, so it's quite
a small, relatively speaking, download. Alright,
so let's start by having a look at how we can access files on the computer's hard disk.
Now we touched on this in an earlier section.
The os.walk function can be used to recursively retrieve the contents of a directory, as well as all
its subdirectories.
Now we used it back then as a way to explain about recursion, but I didn't mention that os.walk
is a generator.
So in other words, it doesn't build up a huge list of all the files and directories on the hard drive.
It just returns them as needed.
So let's actually see how that works in practice. So, we're going to start by, line 1, import os. Then we're going to do root
equals music. That's going to be the root level folder.
And we use specifying a relative path so that it's going to use the music subfolder that you can see in the
project pane.
If you put these files somewhere else, obviously you'll need to put the path to wherever you've
actually unzipped your files - those files.
Next we want to type in for space path comma space directories comma space files space in
os.walk. Then we want parentheses root comma, then topdown is equal to True in parentheses and
a colon.
And then we want to type print path so we can see the path, and then we wanna go through, iterate through the
files.
It's going to be for f in files colon, and we'll do a print parentheses double quotes slash t, the tab
character.
Then we want to do left and right curly brace, and then end the double quotes dot format and f.
OK, so that's our program, and as you saw again on line 3,
that's the path, so that's going to be found in our current directory because I've specified a relative
path.
If we run the program,
we can see there's quite a bit of content showing there down at the bottom of the screen.
I'm just going to stop it - go back and have a look. There's stacks of content there. I can scroll back right up to the top,
to see what we're dealing with.
What I'll do there, just to make things a little bit easier, I'll move the run pane to the right,
so we can see a bit more. That's a bit better. Now on a Windows or a Mac machine,
you should see the directories and files in alphabetical order. And that's more or less working here,
but noting that the numbers, because of the way of the track numbers, 1 and 10 11 12 and 13 - it's sorting
it in that order, which is a little bit weird but that's how computers work.
And obviously, if we had a zero there, we'd pad out those levels with a zero - it would have sorted correctly.
But in general, you'll see the directories and files in alphabetical order.
That's on a Windows or Mac machine, but Linux doesn't present sorted directory listings by default.
So you may well end up having your directories appear in a different order if you're running on Linux. But
on my Mac, as a rule, you can see you've got 1000 Maniac's, 10cc, ACDC and so on. Now within each
directory, we're getting the files printed.
I think you'd agree that's pretty powerful.
os.walk recursively visits every directory from the root, and for every one it returns a tuple.
Now the first item in the tuple, on line 5, is a string containing the name of the current directory,
which are unpacking into path in our code.
Next is a list of all the directories in the current directory,
and then finally, there's a list containing the names of all the files.
Now what we can do, is see this a little bit better by using that trick that we've worked on this section,
of pausing for input each time round the loop.
So let's make some changes to the code to do that.
So what I'm going to do is, just comment out these two lines - the for loop - and instead, what we'll do is we'll leave
the print path in there.
Then we'll do a print parentheses directories, print parentheses files,
and then we'll do an input, left and right parentheses. So if we actually run this program
now - let's expand this as a little bit so we can see a bit more of it.
So we get the root path printed at the top there - music.
That's obviously where we're starting, where the os.walk process or function is starting, and below that is a list
of all the directories within music, and you can see if I scroll over, there's quite a few there as
I scroll right over. Then at the end, the last list,
well that's an empty list because there aren't any files at this level. And we can check that by
expanding the music directory of the project pane.
So we've obviously got all these subdirectories, but there aren't actually any files -
if we scroll right down to the end - that are actually in the music directory itself. It's only subfolders.
And by the way, on Linux you may need to do a bit of scrolling around, because the order of the project
pane
won't match the output. Intellij sorts the directories alphabetically.
Now in fact, we will have to scroll slightly on Windows and Mac in a moment, too.
And that's because intelligence sorts
lower case letters before numbers,
so 1000 Maniacs appears after 10cc in the project pane.
You can see here at the top, and you can see that's happening there with 10cc and 1000 Maniacs.
Alright, so back to my run pane,
and if I press Enter again, the loop goes round. This time the os.walk function yields the next tuple.
Now it's gone into the 1000 Maniac's directory,
so that's the value that's printed.
Now, there's only one directory in here and if we can go back and have a look - Our Time in Eden, as you
can see. And again, there's no files rather, at that level,
so again an empty list.
That's because that's the name of the album.
But if we go back again, pressing enter, this time
it's actually moved into the Our Time in Eden directory. And this time because there's no subdirectories,
the second entry, the lists, is actually empty but we can see all the files there. And track number 1, you can
see there right across, to and including track number 9 and you can see that matches with the list
here,
bearing in mind that some of the earlier ones, because of the way that they've been actually numbered, are actually
appearing at the start of the list, due to the sorting. And basically so on. So every time we press ENTER,
os.walk yields the next tuple.
And once it's exhausted the contents of one directory, it backtracks and continues with the next directory
of the parent.
So we get the contents of 10cc appearing if I press enter
now. You can see 10cc showing up there.
Now looking at the contents of the 10cc directory, the path contains the artist 10cc, and the name
of the album, The Best Of The Early Years.
Now the list contains all the songs on the album.
We can expand that out, The Best Of The Early Years, as you can see, and I can press enter there, and there's all the songs once we actually
go into that subfolder.
So whenever we get a file list that isn't empty, we can extract all the details we need to populate a
database. And it turns out, the code for doing that's pretty simple.
But when dealing with file paths, don't be tempted to just split the string at the slashes, and that's
because the os module has a path module that knows about file names and can correctly pass them for us.
So to see what I mean there, let's just close
that run window, and we're just going to change a bit of code. So what I'm going to do, is come up here, and I'm
going to put if files,
and then what I'm going to do is leave the print in there. What I'll do is, I'll just comment that out.
So print path and I'm going to do first underscore split is equal to os.path.split path. Then
we're going to do print and print first_split in parentheses, and then we do a print parentheses. I'm going to do
double quotes and put a star in there,
times 40, so we've got a nice little separator. Actually, what I'll do is delete the rest of that code because we really don't
need that anymore.
So if we actually run this, and scroll back up to the top,
notice how os.path.split has separated our last directory, or the last directory - Our Time in
Eden -
from the path it's on.
So that's separated out the album name for us.
Now if we repeat the operation on the first element of the tuple, we can actually get access to the
artist name.
So I'll close that down again, and what we're going to do is, after the first_split print out, we're gonna do second
underscore split is equal to os.path.split parentheses,
first underscore split. Then in square brackets, 0, then in parentheses. Then let's then print
out the second_split, and to get the list of songs, we can iterate over the files list.
Now we've already checked that it's not empty,
as you can see on line 6, with the if files statement.
So consequently, we could just use the normal string splitting to split the name from the song number.
So let's do that.
So after the second split printout, we're going to put for f in files colon.
We're going to put song_details is equal to if.split, then in parentheses, single quote
space dash space, and then we're going to print song_details.
And actually, I guess what we should really be doing there with the split, is we should be stripping off the
file extension as well.
So let's actually do that, so we've got at the moment, song_details here.
We're going to do that split,
but let's start off by putting, at the head of that, f.split parentheses single quote dot emp3,
remembering that we've referred to these files or called them, or have added a file extension of dot
emp3, parentheses, and then off the result of that we do another if.split with the single quotes and a
space and a dash.
So let's actually run this and see what happens.
And whoops, it didn't quite work, and we've got a typo there. Let's just get back and fix that up. What I should've
done, I put dot f there - of course, it's not dot f. Dot f is at the start, or f dot is at the start because we're referring
to an individual file.
But the second split, we're spitting it based on the output that comes back after the first one.
So if we run that now, and what that should actually be is, we're trying to actually remove the file extension.
Well that's not going to be a split, of course, that's going to be a strip. So we want to strip out.
So that should be s t r i p.
So f dot strip parentheses single quotes dot emp3. Then results of that - we want to do a dot split,
and in parentheses and single quote space dash space. So third time lucky, let's run that. Well this time we got some
output. That's good.
Let's just scroll back up to the top and have a look.
So you can see it's still not quite working correctly.
It almost worked, but strip actually works with a sequence and not a string. So it doesn't actually remove
the string dot emp3. It checks the beginning and end of the file name for any of the characters in dot
emp3, and keeps removing them, regardless of order, until it can't remove any more.
So all our third songs, as you can see here, have a blank song number, for example, and you can see these other
examples of characters - like that would obviously be an e there. The word face has been removed
as well.
Alright so to deal with that, we can slice the string before splitting it.
And we want
everything except the last four characters.
Well it would be four characters for mp3 files
but our extension's dot emp3,
so we went all but the last five characters.
So let's actually have a go at doing that.
I'll close this down again and I'll fix this strip,
and what we'll do instead is replace that code.
We're going to put f left and right square brackets, then within there we're going to put colon minus 5.
Now by not specifying a start for the splice, Python defaults to the start of the string. For
the stop value, we go up to but not including, five characters in from the end of the string.
And we no longer need that, of course. So let's just delete that.
Alright, so we've now removed the extension and we're still adding the split on the end
to remove that from the song details. So let's actually have a look at running that and see what that does. Alright, I'm going
back up to the top to have a look.
And I think it's now looking a lot better,
as you can see. Alright, so at this point we've now finally got all the data we need, and we can use
it in sequel insert statements to write the data to a database. And that's pretty much how the music database
for Section 13 was created.
Well pretty much. I'll come back to that later.
So as I said, os.walk is a generator, so it doesn't try to read every single file and
directory at once into a huge list.
It's only yielding the details for a single directory at a time.
So ultimately, we could have millions of albums, and we can process them in this way without running out of
memory. So generators can get even more useful
when you use them to create other generators, and we'll start working on that in the next video.